# Print Directives

Print directives are post-processing on the output of a
[`print` command](print.md).

Here are all print directives that are available by default. For information on
writing custom print directives, see [Plugins](../dev/plugins.md).

[TOC]

## Built-in directives

### `|bidiSpanWrap` {#bidiSpanWrap}

If the overall directionality of the print command is different from the global
directionality, then the compiler wraps the print command output in a span with
`dir=ltr` or `dir=rtl`. Any user-generated content has the potential to be in a
different direction.
https://www.w3.org/International/articles/inline-bidi-markup/uba-basics is a
good resource for understanding the Unicode bidirectional algorithm.

NOTE: The template compiler applies autoescaping before evaluating
`|bidiSpanWrap`, which is safe because `|bidiSpanWrap` correctly handles
HTML-escaped text.

### `|bidiUnicodeWrap` {#bidiUnicodeWrap}

If the overall directionality the print command is different from the global
directionality, then the compiler wraps the print command output with Unicode
bidi formatting characters `LRE` or `RLE` at the start and `PDF` at the end.

NOTE: This directive serves the same purpose as `|bidiSpanWrap`, but you should
only use it in situations where HTML markup is not applicable, for example
inside an HTML `<option>` element.

### `|changeNewlineToBr` {#changeNewlineToBr}

Changes newlines sequences: `\n`, `\r`, or `\r\n` to `<br>`.

### `|cleanHtml`, `|cleanHtml:'ul','li'` {#cleanHtml}

Removes all but a small, safe subset of HTML from its input. This converts other
[content kinds](../dev/security.md#content_kinds) (such as `text`) into `html`.
If content with the `html` kind is passed to this print directive then the
content is not changed.

Note that all attributes are removed except `dir` for directionality.

The default set of allowed tags is: `b`, `br`, `em`, `i`, `s`, `strong`, `sub`,
`sup`, and `u`.

It may take a variable number of arguments which are additional tags to be
considered safe. Only `ul`, `ol`, `li`, `hr`, and `span` can be added to the
allowlist.

### `|insertWordBreaks:NNN` {#insertWordBreaks}

**WARNING**: This print directive is deprecated, and should not be used. Prefer
wrapping with CSS `word-wrap: break-word`.

This can insert `<wbr>` tags into content if there are more than `NNN`
characters between word breaks.

### `|truncate` {#truncate}

**IMPORTANT**: This print directive is generally unadvisable.

Truncates a string to a maximum length with trailing ellipsis. Add the optional
parameter: `false` to truncate without an ellipsis. For example, `{'Lorem Ipsum'
│truncate:8}` produces `Lorem...`, while `{'Lorem Ipsum' │truncate:8,false}`
produces `Lorem Ip`.

However, the simple truncation does not guarantee consistent visual results. For
example, in common fonts, the character "x" is about half the width of a Chinese
character, and "l" is half that. It's better to use CSS size constraints and
`text-overflow: ellipsis` when possible.

Furthermore, this print directive is not unicode sensitive so special characters
like emojis which are encoded using multiple UTF-16 code points, can be
corrupted when truncated.

### `|filterImageDataUri` {#filterImageDataUri}

Accepts only data URI's that contain an image.

Developers use this simultaneously to allow data URI's, but also to ensure that
the image tag won't initiate any HTTP requests.

NOTE: We may consider deprecating this now that img/data URIs are allowed by
default, since it's unlikely too many projects need a mechanism to double-check
that images are only loaded from data URIs; anyone else that does can simply
scan the URL and fail if it detects http/https.

### `|filterSipUri` {#filterSipUri}

Accepts only sip URIs but does not verify complete correctness.

The RFC for sip: https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3261

The RFC for URIs: https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3986

### `|filterTelUri` {#filterTelUri}

Accepts only 'tel://' URIs but does not verify complete correctness.

The RFC for the tel: URI https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3966

## Directives used primarily by the autoescaper

Soy autoescaper internally uses many directives which are not available to
users. To trigger them, just print a variable in the appropriate context, e.g.
`<hr {$attributes}>`. Some of these directives are available to users for legacy
reasons but their usage is discouraged.

### `|escapeUri` {#escapeUri}

Escapes a value so it is safe to embed in a URI, for example in an `href`.

### `|normalizeUri` {#normalizeUri}

Allows arbitrary content to be included in a URI regardless of the string
delimiters of the surrounding language. This normalizes, but does not escape, so
it does not affect URI special characters, but instead escapes HTML, CSS, and JS
delimiters.

### `|filterCspNonceValue` {#filterCspNonceValue}

Validates the values printed in `nonce=` attributes. Ensures that the value is a
base64 encoded string as defined by the
[CSP3 specification](https://www.w3.org/TR/CSP3/#grammardef-base64-value)

This directives is used internally by the compiler as part of its support for
ContentSecurityPolicy nonces. See our
[security guide](../dev/security.md#content_security_policy) for more
information.

### `|whitespaceHtmlAttributes` {#whitespaceHtmlAttributes}

This directive is used internally by the compiler to optimize whitespace inside
of Html tags.
